.ocon
Super ROM - Lucid
REPORT PRINTING ROUTINES
========================
.ocoff

Introduction
============

The report printing routine may be thought of as a scenario made up of 
from 1 to 5 scenes, in which each of 4 actors: Groucho, Chico, Harpo, and
 Zeppo, each with an unvarying message, performs in three scenes.  Scenes 
2, 3, and 4 may each be used in any desired sequence.   Each may be 
repeated as often as necessary or omitted altogether, making the scenario
flexible enough to accomodate a wide variety of print formats.  However, 
constraints are imposed by the unvarying roles of the actors and the fixed 
order of their performances in each scene.

Scene 1 is presented after the page header is printed.  If the page header 
option is not used, Scene 1 starts at the top of each page.  Scene 2 is 
presented on Cue 2; Scene 3 on Cue 3; Scene 4 after both cues are 
presented simultaneously; and Scene 5, followed by the grand total, after 
the last line item in the Lucid file is printed.  Scenes 1 and 5 are used 
in most print routines.  The others may be used, as required.

To use any of these scenes in printing, the roles of the individual actors 
must be defined in a Report Template file and the relevant cue criterion 
must be defined by a formula in the Report Specifier Block.  Several 
Report Template files may be used to print different reports from the same 
Lucid file.  Scenes, cues, and actors, in their order of appearance, are 
shown in the following table:

     SCENE  CUE                ACTORS
     =====  ===  ==================================
       1     *   Groucho  Harpo
       2     2   Zeppo    Harpo
       3     3   Chico    Groucho
       4    2&3  Zeppo    Chico    Groucho  Harpo
       5     *   Zeppo    Chico

               * See text above

Report Template file
====================

A Report Template file is a text (.DO) file containing 6 Component 
Templates, separated by Code-0 paragraph markers.  Its filename, which 
might be REPRT1.DO, will be entered in the first cell of the Report 
Specifier Block (see below).  The 6 Component Templates are as follows:

     a) Line item template
     b) Grand total template
     c) Page header template
     d) Page footer template
     e) Groucho
     f) Chico
     g) Harpo
     h) Zeppo

A Component Template may contain words, a record number, or cell 
references in any combination.  A record number (line number in the Lucid 
table) is shown as [#  ].  A Cell Reference may have the form [D#   ] or 
the form [AB1  ], in which the first form (regular field) will print the 
text or numerical contents of the cell in Column D of the record; and the 
second form (virtual field) will invoke the formula in Cell AB1.  In each 
case, the number of spaces between square brackets, plus the two spaces 
occupied by the brackets themselves will determine the space cleared for 
printing that field.  This cleared space is independent of the column 
widths in the Lucid table.  But the format in which numbers are printed 
(number of decimal places and presence or absence of dollar sign) will be 
that selected when individual columns or cells of the Lucid table are 
formatted.

 A Line Item Template might look like this:

[    ][A#   ][C#      ][D#     ][J# ][E#  ][F#  ][G#  ][H#  ][Z1  ][AB3 ]

The bracketed empty space at the beginning of this example would indent 
the printing line.  The letters used as Cell References may be either 
upper or lower case.  The space between brackets must allow for space 
between printing columns.  Note that text (labels) will print flush left 
in the cleared space and that numbers will print flush right.

The paragraph marker is typed by holding down the CODE key and typing 0. 
The result will appear on the screen as a symbol (ASCII 175) resembling a 
reversed P, but may print, depending on the printer used, as a slash if 
the Report template file is printed.  When the file is invoked for 
printing Lucid data, the symbol is not printed, but is understood as a 
signal introducing the next Component Template.

Example
=======

As an example:  For a multipage report, the Page Header component of the 
Report Template file was left blank.  Groucho was given the role of 
printing the page heading and the column headings.  Chico's role was to 
deliver 3 carriage returns.  Harpo, as in the old movies, is silent. 
Zeppo's role was to deliver the label, "Page subtotal", followed by the 
sum accumulated on the current page and preceded by enough spaces to make 
that sum print flush right.  The Page Footer was Page [Z2], preceded by 
enough spaces to center it.  The formula in Cell Z2 was +NBP and that cell 
was formatted for zero decimal places.

Also, in this example, in order to bring on all four actors for Scene 4,
Cues 2 and 3 were indentical: +LN1=50.  Since neither cue was presented 
independently, Scenes 2 and 3 were not invoked.

Scene 1 was used only to start the first page and Scene 5, only to end the 
last page.  In between, Scene 4 used two actors to end the current page 
and brought back the two that started the first page to start the next 
page.

Report specifier block
======================

The Cue criteria must be described, by formula, in a The Report Specifier 
Block, often placed in Column DR of the Lucid table.  When there are 
several Report template files with distinctive filenames, each additional 
report may use a separate Report Specifier Block.  For those additional 
blocks, Columns DS through DU are often used.  Each block uses the first 
10 cells in the column as follows:


     001 Report Template filename
     002 Record Selection criterion (formula)
     003 Cue 3 (formula)
     004 Cue 2 (formula)
     005 Number of columns of label (1, except for mailing lists)
     006 Starting count for NB1 (number of times Cue 3 is issued) *
     007 Starting count for NB2 (number of times Cue 2 is issued) *
     008 Starting count, usually 1, for NBP (number of pages)
     009 Number of lines per page (usually 66)
     010 Left margin

     * Since NB1 or NB2 may also be used as an invoice number, the entry 
       here could be a number larger than 1, say 1000.

General Rules
=============

In adapting the scenario to a particular set of requirements, the first 
step is to identify each point at which the printing of line items must be 
interrupted.  At each such point, a cue must be triggered by a formula 
that recognizes the peculiar attributes of the line preceding the 
interruption.  In Example, above, the peculiar attribute was that it was 
the 50th line on that page.

The second step is to recognize that Scene 1, which does not require a 
cue, will be staged early in the printing, that Groucho will deliver the 
first message, and that he will be accompanied by Harpo, who may be mute.

The third step is to determine whether any interruption depends on TWO 
atributes of the line which precedes it.  A cue based on two attributes 
would invoke Scene 4, with all four actors speaking in the order shown in 
the table.  Groucho and Harpo would deliver the same messages in Scene 4 
as they did in Scene 1; but only after the other two have delivered their 
messages, if any.  It now becomes apparent that if Scene 4 is used, 
Groucho and Harpo can not be assigned any messages that would be 
inappropriate in either Scene 1 or Scene 4.  That fact narrows the range 
of messages that can be assigned to these two actors.  It is also apparent 
that if there is to be a Scene 4, no message that would be inappropriate 
in that scene can be assigned to ANY actor, because all four of them will 
perform in that scene.

Scene 5, which, like Scene 1, does not require a cue, will be staged at 
the end of the printing.  If a page subtotal is to be printed at that 
point, that will be the message delivered by either Zeppo or Chico, who 
will deliver the same message in any other scene in which he is on stage.  
That means that if there is a page subtotal and also a Scene 4, there will 
be a page subtotal in that scene.

Any other circumstance that requires a subtotal will require a cue, a 
scene, and an actor who delivers the current subtotal every time he is on 
stage.  That means that if there is a Scene 4, there can be only one kind 
of subtotal (and the corresponding grand total) in the report.  If Scene 4 
is used and there are product subtotals or district subtotals, there 
cannot be page subtotals.

After the third step, the steps needed to complete the scenario adaptation 
must be left to the ingenuity of the programmer, because they depend on 
report requirements.

