At the October 20 meeting of the Danville Tigers
(a San Francisco Bay Area Model 100 users group
headed by Bill Templeton) I saw what I thought was
a very useful and very well priced Model 100
accessory.  This is the Power Pillow, a black
sheathed battery holder that holds four size D
batteries, that attaches to the bac of the Model
100 with velcro.  It acts both as a very powerful
alternate source of electricity for the M100, and
as a stand (in place of those little legs they
sell) for it as well.  It looks sort of like a
black cylindar, about 1 and 1/2 inches in diameter
and roughly as long as the M100 is wide.  On the
negative side, four size D batteries weight quite
a bit.  But if you find yourself using the M100
remotely a lot, and going thru a lot of AA
batteries, this might be a good thing to
consider.  And the price of the power pillow is
quite reasonable:  $14.95 plus $2 shipping
(California residents add 97 cents tax). 
Batteries not included.  At my local Payless store
here in California, the four alkaline D batteries
it takes cost me under $4.00.   This item is NOT
being advertised (this keeps the operation small,
and the price down) but it can be ordered from:

  Hanson Mc Bride Services
  P.O. Box 23438
  Pleasant Hill, CA 94523  

     Most members of the Danville Tigers have
bought one, and I just bought mine the other day
and am very pleased with it.
                                                                                                                