6/18/86

Here's the official Press Release on the Tandy 102 


RS-86-087

NEW TANDY 102 LAPTOP COMPUTER GIVES USERS TRUE PORTABILITY

     Tandy Corporation's newest addition to its line of laptop computers,
the Tandy 102 portable computer, is now available at more than 7,000 
Radio Shack stores, Computer Centers and participating dealers 
nationwide.

    The 102 is an improved version of the industry's best-selling laptop
computer, the Model 100 portable computer.  The 102 is compatible with 
all Radio Shack hardware and software for the Model 100 portable 
computer.

    Weighing only three pounds, the Tandy 102 portable computer has a
thinner profile (1.5" X 11.8" X 8.5") than the 100 yet contains exactly 
the same features.

    The Tandy 102 portable computer uses an 8-bit 80C85 microprocessor
with a clock speed of 2.4 mHz.  The standard 24K memory is expandable to 
32K.

    The Tandy 102 portable computer features a 40 character X 8 line LCD
display with large upper and lower case easy-to-read ASCII characters and 
a full-size 56-key typewriter style keyboard with embedded 10-key 
datapad, eight programmable function keys, four command keys and four 
cursor control keys.

    The 102 includes five built-in ROM software programs: BASIC, TEXT, 
TELCOM, ADDRSS and SCHEDL for text editing, address/telephone filing, 
appointment record-keeping, telecommunications and BASIC language 
programming.

    Users have the ability to access other computers or national 
information services by phone with the computer's internal 300-baud 
direct-connect auto-dial modem.

    Interfaces for the 102 include the RS-232C serial communications
port, parallel printer, cassette tape and bar code reader.  An improved 
system bus connector has been moved to the back panel of the computer, 
from its bottom location on the Model 100 portable computer.

    The Tandy 102 portable computer will operate up to 20 hours using
four "AA" alkaline batteries (not included).  An optional U. L. listed AC 
power supply is available.  Internal rechargeable nickel cadmium will 
maintain memory intact for 30 days if power is off (depending on the 
amount of RAM installed) and are automatically recharged from the AA 
batteries or AC power.

    Suggested retail price for the 24K Tandy 102 portable computer (Cat. 
 No. 26-3803) is $499.

                ###





