The following are a sample of some of 
the subroutines I've gleaned from the 
NEC ROM.  Suggestions for improvement 
of the format are welcome.  I'll try to 
clear up any ambiguities that have 
crept into my notes.

It would certainly be interesting to 
get all the NECy owners on this SIG to 
contribute similar material.  Please 
note that, to be useful, contributions 
should use roughly the same format and 
supply the same information.

For the record, none of the information 
published here was obtained from 
"classified" NECHE sources.

I don't get a chance to log on to CIS 
much, so messages may scroll off before 
I see them.  It's best to either leave 
me E-mail or drop a note via MCI mail 
(my MCI account number is 114-5685).

               Cordially,
               Alex Lane 75715,1370
TITLE:  RST 5

ENTRANCE: 1338H (4920)

INCOMING REGISTERS: none

REGISTERS AFFECTED: A

REMARKS:
     This subroutine is called when the 
RST5 instruction is executed.

     Contents of FA8BH (64139) are 
loaded into A, the number 11 is 
subtracted, and the routine returns.  
Note that all condition flags except CY 
may be affected.
               Alex Lane 75715,1370
TITLE:  Lower-to-upper case

ENTRANCE: 12B6H (4790)

INCOMING REGISTERS: HL

REGISTERS AFFECTED: A

REMARKS:
     HL contains the ASCII value of the 
letter to be tested.

     Accumulator is loaded with HL 
contents.  If the value in the 
accumulator is outside the limits of 
ASCII lower-case letters, the routine 
returns; otherwise, the accumulator 
contents are changed to upper-case, and 
the routine returns.
               Alex Lane 75715,1370
TITLE:  RST 3

ENTRANCE: 0018H (24)

INCOMING REGISETRS: HL, DE

REGISTERS AFFECTED: A

REMARKS:
     This subroutine is called when the 
RST3 instruction is executed.

     The HL and DE register pairs are 
compared, and the zero and carry flags 
are set as shown in the following 
table:

  |  HL = DE  |  HL > DE  |  HL < DE  |
--+-----------+-----------+-----------+
Z |     1     |     0     |     0     |
--+-----------+-----------+-----------+
C |     0     |     0     |     1     |
--+-----------+-----------+-----------+
               Alex Lane 75715,1370
