This is a procedure for transferring ASCII (.do) and M100 Basic (.ba) files
between the Amiga and Radio Shack Model 100 computers.

1. Cable Connection
-------------------
     -Use an Amiga modem cable (power pins deactivated).
     -Install a Null Modem Adapter on the Model 100 end of the cable (Radio
Shack part # 26-1496).  This is rather difficult to do since the adapter does
not fit securely on the RS232 port on the back of the 100.  I had to dismantle
the case in order to install the connecting screws that come with the adapter,
since there are nuts on the back of the housing that cannot be reached from the
outside.  CAUTION: This probably voids the warranty.  Also, it helps to trim
the plastic around the RS232 port to allow the adapter to fit better.
     -Connect the cable between the two computers.

2. Setup
-------------------
     -Turn on both computers and load the terminal programs.  This assumes you
are using the built-in Telecomm program in the 100 and the Online! terminal
program on the Amiga.
     -Set both computers to the same communication configuration, i.e:
         300 or 1200 BAUD
          7 BITS
          EVEN PARITY
          1 STOP BIT

     -Set both computers to HALF DUPLEX (this allows anything typed on one
terminal to echo to the other).
     -Test the setup by typing a few characters on both keyboards.

3. Uploading files from the M100 to the Amiga
---------------------------------------------
     -Clear Capture Buffer
     -Open Capture Buffer to the diskfile into which you wish to place the M100
file.
     -Use the normal M100 Upload procedure to upload an ASCII file.

    -NOTE: During transfer, the display output may be garbled, especially if
the file contains any format or control codes, but the file will be stored
properly.
  -When the transfer is completed, close the Capture Buffer.

4. Downloading files from the Amiga to the M100
-----------------------------------------------
     -Load the Capture Buffer with the ASCII file you wish to download.
     -Use the normal M100 procedure to initiate the download, specifying the
filename under which you want it stored.
     -Select Capture/Send/Go from the Online! menu.  Again, the display will
probably be garbled, but the file should store properly.
     -When transmission is complete, terminate the download on the M100 (press
F2 again).

5. Transferring M100 Basic Programs
-----------------------------------
     -From the M100 main menu, load the basic program which you wish to upload
     -'Break' the program and then save it as a document (.do) file.
     -The resulting file is an ASCII textfile and can be uploaded as above.
     -To Download and run such a file on the M100, download the ASCII textfile
as above.  Then, from the M100 main menu, enter BASIC and load the .do file
(i.e. "LOAD GAME.DO").  The file will be tokenized automatically as it is
loaded and will run normally.
     -Don't forget to save as a Basic file (i.e. SAVE "GAME.BA").

Please direct any comments or suggestions to:

Bob Gettig
(813) 535-5166 (voice)
